Install TURN/STUN server with coturn on Debian/Ubuntu (#35)
hetzneronline/community-content: tutorials/install-turn-stun-server-on-debian-ubuntu-with-coturn/01.en.md

# Install TURN/STUN Server on Debian/Ubuntu with coturn

## Introduction

We will install a basic TURN/STUN server with [coturn](https://github.com/coturn/coturn).

> The TURN Server is a VoIP media traffic NAT traversal server and gateway. It can be used as a general-purpose network traffic TURN server and gateway, too.

Reviewer: What's meant by this? Explain it a little bit less tetchier

Author: It is already explained in a very basic way. People who do not understand these two sentences probably do not need a TURN or STUN server.

Reviewer 2: Yes, you should be more precise about that.
Maybe add a Mermaid Diagram, they are supported in the Community Tutorial Renderer.

Something like that: 

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant ClientA
    participant TURN Server
    participant ClientB
    opt p2p not possible
        TURN Server->>+ClientA: Forward Signals
        TURN Server->>-ClientB: Forward Signals
    end
    ClientA->ClientB: p2p communication
    Note over ClientA,ClientB: p2p/e2e SRTP Encrypted Streaming ( TURN Server not involved )
```

Will render to 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6449399/54075491-45842700-42a0-11e9-8bb9-11ef9c91faae.png)

Reviewer 2: Yes, you should be more precise about that.
Maybe add a Mermaid Diagram, they are supported in the Community Tutorial Renderer.

Something like that: 

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant ClientA
    participant TURN Server
    participant ClientB
    opt p2p not possible
        TURN Server->>+ClientA: Forward Signals
        TURN Server->>-ClientB: Forward Signals
    end
    ClientA->ClientB: p2p communication
    Note over ClientA,ClientB: p2p/e2e SRTP Encrypted Streaming ( TURN Server not involved )
```

Will render to 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6449399/54075491-45842700-42a0-11e9-8bb9-11ef9c91faae.png)

Reviewer 2: > probably do not need a TURN or STUN server
People don't know what they don't know :) Somebody 100% certain about the Topic would probably not read the Tutorial.

Author: Diagram added as suggested in 5d77c0c2764fc7a6f69a122572e26b85a8dd0fdd

Example projects which uses TURN/STUN:

- [Nextcloud Talk](https://nextcloud.com/talk/)
- [Jitsi Meet](https://jitsi.org/jitsi-meet/)
- [Matrix Server](https://matrix.org/)
- [ejabberd](https://www.ejabberd.im/)

If you self-host one of these applications you can, for example, use your own TURN/STUN server there.

**Prerequisites**

> - At least a  small virtual server, e.g. [CX11](https://www.hetzner.com/cloud), with a root shell.

Author: Thanks, I have tried `#cx11` but that didn't worked.

_turns._tcp.example.com.  14400 IN SRV  5 0 5349 turn.example.com.
```

For best performance and fail-safe you should have at least two TURN/STUN servers.
We slightly need to change the DNS records for two:
```dns
_stun._udp.example.com.   14400 IN SRV  5  50 3478 turn1.example.com.
_stun._udp.example.com.   14400 IN SRV  10 50 3478 turn2.example.com.
_stun._tcp.example.com.   14400 IN SRV  5  50 3478 turn1.example.com.
_stun._tcp.example.com.   14400 IN SRV  10 50 3478 turn2.example.com.
_stuns._tcp.example.com.  14400 IN SRV  5  50 5349 turn1.example.com.
_stuns._tcp.example.com.  14400 IN SRV  10 50 5349 turn2.example.com.
_turn._udp.example.com.   14400 IN SRV  5  50 3478 turn1.example.com.
_turn._udp.example.com.   14400 IN SRV  10 50 3478 turn2.example.com.
_turn._tcp.example.com.   14400 IN SRV  5  50 3478 turn1.example.com.
_turn._tcp.example.com.   14400 IN SRV  10 50 3478 turn2.example.com.
_turns._tcp.example.com.  14400 IN SRV  5  50 5349 turn1.example.com.
_turns._tcp.example.com.  14400 IN SRV  10 50 5349 turn2.example.com.
```
Do not forget to setup DNS records (A and AAAA) for `turn1.example.com` and turn2.example.com` as mentioned above.

> Theoretically you could also deploy a second A and AAAA records for `turn.example.com` and `stun.example.com` but this is not the recommended way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Theoretically you could also deploy a second A and AAAA record for `turn.example.com` and `stun.example.com` but this is not the recommended way.
```

## Step 2 - Installation

First we will need to install `coturn` on our server.
`apt-get install coturn`

For the moment we will stop `coturn`
`systemctl stop coturn`

> ## Step 3 - Configuring

Reviewer: This part needs to be resorted. You should first name the configuration file, then explain what to change in it.

Author: Fixed with 949290c1db06a703fb9426a5dab969128bd48269

> Open the file and remove the `#` in front of `TURNSERVER_ENABLED=1` in order to enable the TURN server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to enable the TURN server, open the file and remove the `#` in front of `TURNSERVER_ENABLED=1`.
```

> The configuration file is located at `/etc/turnserver.conf`. First we move the original file with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration file is located at `/etc/turnserver.conf`. First we move the original version of this file using
```

```bash
mv /etc/turnserver.conf /etc/turnserver.conf.orig
```

> than we open`/etc/turnserver.conf` with an editor and paste the following configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
than we open/create `/etc/turnserver.conf` in an editor of our choice and paste the following configuration:
```

```
listening-port=3478
tls-listening-port=5349

fingerprint
lt-cred-mech

use-auth-secret
static-auth-secret=replace-this-secret

realm=turn.example.com

total-quota=100
stale-nonce=600

cert=/etc/letsencrypt/live/turn.example.com/cert.pem
pkey=/etc/letsencrypt/live/turn.example.com/privkey.pem
cipher-list="ECDHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA512:DHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA512:ECDHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384:DHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384:ECDHE-RSA-AES256-SHA384"

no-sslv3
no-tlsv1
no-tlsv1_1
#no-tlsv1_2

dh2066

no-stdout-log
log-file=/var/tmp/turn.log
#log-file=/dev/null

no-loopback-peers
no-multicast-peers

proc-user=turnserver
proc-group=turnserver
```

> Create the secret with

Reviewer: What's this secret need for?

```suggestion
Generate the secret by using
```

Author: You do not really create the certificate, you have to register it. You only say `create` if you self sign it.

```bash
sed -i "s/replace-this-secret/$(openssl rand -hex 32)/" /etc/turnserver.conf
```

> ## Step 4 - Register Let's Encrypt certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 4 - Create Let's Encrypt certificates
```

Author: You do not really create the certificate, you have to register it. You only say `create` if you self sign it.

We will use [certbot](https://certbot.eff.org/) from [EFF](https://www.eff.org/) for the Let's Encrypt certificates.
```bash
wget https://dl.eff.org/certbot-auto
wget -N https://dl.eff.org/certbot-auto.asc
gpg2 --keyserver pool.sks-keyservers.net --recv-key A2CFB51FA275A7286234E7B24D17C995CD9775F2
gpg2 --trusted-key 4D17C995CD9775F2 --verify certbot-auto.asc certbot-auto
```
The last line should be the following: `gpg: Good signature from "Let's Encrypt Client Team <letsencrypt-client@eff.org>" [ultimate]`
If not, please check again if you have downloaded the correct key. Do *NOT* use the downloaded file if they key does not match.

```bash
chmod a+x ./certbot-auto
./certbot-auto certonly --standalone --rsa-key-size 4096 -m holu@example.com -d turn.example.com
```
You will get an email 30 (and 7) days before the certificates expire to holu@example.com.

## Step 5 - Start and test the TURN/STUN server

> To start coturn execute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will start coturn by executing
```

`systemctl start coturn`

> and now test with `systemctl status coturn` if coturn is running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using `systemctl status coturn` we can test if coturn is running.
```

We do not know yet if our configuration was successful but luckily there is a tester available: [WebRTC samples Trickle ICE](https://webrtc.github.io/samples/src/content/peerconnection/trickle-ice/)

Remove the default server from the list.
The field for “STUN or TURN URI” should look like this:

`stun:stun.example.com`

but you can also use the IP:

`stun:10.0.0.1:3478`

> You can also use port `5349` to test with SSL/TLS encryption here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test SSL/TLS encryption, use port `5349`.
```

You cannot test TURN here as the tester does not support

Next click on `Add Server` and than on `Gather candidates`.

The output should look similar to this:
```
Time    Component       Type    Foundation     Protocol Address         Port        Priority
0.019	1	        host             0          UDP	192.168.0.10	41904	126 | 32512 | 255
0.024	1	        host             2          TCP	192.168.0.10	9	125 | 32704 | 255
0.027	2	        host             0          UDP	192.168.0.10	53438	126 | 32512 | 254
0.030	2	        host             2          TCP	192.168.0.10	9	125 | 32704 | 254
0.134	1	        srflx            1          UDP	78.47.166.55	41904	100 | 32543 | 255

> 0.152	2	        srflx            1          UDP	78.47.166.55	53438	100 | 32543 | 254

Reviewer: What's up with those IPs?

Author: It is your clients internal (private) IP and your public IP address. This is STUNs job. Should be clear if you wanna deploy a STUN server.

0.153	Done
```

> If you get a timeout with `Not reachable?` then probably a firewall is blocking the connection. Check again if the ports, `3478` and `5349`, for the TURN server are opened and if you can reach it externally via telnet or nmap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you get a timeout with `Not reachable?` the connection is probably blocked by a firewall. Check again if the ports `3478` and `5349` for the TURN server are open. Also test if you can reach it from your computer or another server via telnet or nmap.
```

> If everything works as excepted replace `log-file=/var/log/turn.log` with `log-file=/dev/null` to disable IP address logging for best privacy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If everything works as excepted, replace `log-file=/var/log/turn.log` with `log-file=/dev/null` in your configuration file. This disables IP address logging and is best for the privacy of your  users.
```

Author: I have rewritten this a bit in 949290c1db06a703fb9426a5dab969128bd48269
